Distributed Compaction [RFC] (#1485)
slatedb/slatedb: rfcs/002x-distributed-compaction.md

```
+----------------------------------+
|      Compaction Coordinator      |
|   (single process, owns epoch)   |
|                                  |
|  +-------------+  +------------+ |
|  |  Scheduler  |  | State Mgmt | |
|  | (unchanged) |  | (unchanged)| |
|  +------+------+  +------+-----+ |
+---------|----------------|------ +
          |                |
          | write specs    | read Completed, commit to .manifest
          v                v
   +--------------------+ +--------------------+
   |   Object Store     | |   Object Store     |
   |   .compactions     | |   .manifest        |
   +--------+-----------+ +--------------------+
            ^
            |
            | poll (worker read) 
            | claim / heartbeat / complete (worker write)
            |
      +-----+-----+-----+
      v       v         v
  +--------+ +--------+ +--------+
  |Worker 1| |Worker 2| |Worker N|
  | (exec) | | (exec) | | (exec) |
  +--------+ +--------+ +--------+
```

> - **Coordinator** (`CompactorEventHandler`) — always runs embedded in the DB process. Polls the manifest, asks the scheduler for `CompactionSpec` proposals, creates `Compaction` entities, calls `executor.start_compaction_job()`, and commits completed results to the manifest. Scheduler logic is unchanged.

Reviewer: Ohh, I like this idea. It makes sense. And when the writer is offline, no new data is written, so no need to compact.

- **Workers** — poll `.compactions`, claim `Submitted` jobs via optimistic concurrency, execute using the existing `execute_compaction_job` path, report completion. Workers do not touch the manifest or run the scheduler.

### Configuration

#### Coordinator

> Distributed mode becomes a new default allowing additional compactors to be added as needed:

Reviewer: IMO, we should support _only_ distributed mode. By default the `Db` spins up its coordinator and 4 workers (`max_concurrent_compactions=4`). Standalones can then be spun up as needed. This will keep things simpler--only one way of doing this.

Author: Sorry this is what I meant but realize that saying "default" makes the distinction unclear.

The coordinator detects stale workers during its periodic poll: for each `Running` compaction where `now() - last_heartbeat_ms > worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms`, reset `status = Submitted` and clear `worker_id`. The reclaimed compaction retains its `output_ssts`, so the next worker resumes from the last checkpoint via `ResumingIterator` (seeks input iterators past the last written key, avoiding re-processing already compacted data).

### Worker Lifecycle

1. **Start** — generate a ULID `worker_id`, load config.
2. **Poll** — read `.compactions` for `Submitted` work.
3. **Claim** — optimistic transition to `Running` (see claim protocol).
4. **Execute** — run `execute_compaction_job`: build iterators from `CompactionSpec`, apply filters/merge ops, write output SSTs to `compacted/`, persist progress at each SST boundary.
5. **Complete** — write `status = Completed` with final `output_ssts` to `.compactions`.
6. **Loop** — return to step 2.

### Manifest Commit Protocol

Only the coordinator commits manifest updates (preserves single-writer invariant):

> 1. Observe a `Completed` compaction in `.compactions`.

Reviewer: I think this needs some thought. How does the coordinator know if it has synced a job. Suppose we have a timeline like:

```
t0, coordinator dies
t1,  worker1 updates job1 to complete
t2, coordinator starts again
```

How does coordinator know whether it synced job1 to the manifest or not. I don't think the coordinator can just check the manifest and see if job1's SSTs (from output_ssts) are in the manifest. What if we had:

```
t0, coordinator1 dies
t1,  worker1 updates job1 to complete
t2, coordinator2 starts again
t3, coordinator2 syncs job1 (correctly)
t4-t7, ..the SSTs in job1 are compacted out by subsequent jobs
t8, coordinator2 dies,
t9, coordinator3 starts
```

How does coordinator3 know whether to sync job1's SSTs again. It's showing as completed, but it's unclear if it ever got synced. The SSTs are no longer in the manifest. But the job might remain since we keep recent_compacted_jobs around for recovery and GC reasons. 🤔 

Needs some thought. I could be off on some of the details here.

Reviewer: I suppose we have this problem already? 🤔

Author: I'll have to look into this one more. I should have some time later today and tomorrow.

Reviewer: I do feel like we addressed it in the current protocol. But I don't remember how. If so, it's probably a non-issue since the coordinator protocol isn't really changing. But worth a double check.

Author: This is addressed in the current protocol but the assumption made makes it fall apart in the distributed model. In the current protocol, it's assumed that the manifest write happens before .compactions write, so `Completed` means that the manifest was definitely updated. In the distributed model `Completed` does not mean that it has synced because external worker nodes are writing the jobs as `Completed` independent of manifest writes. 

I'm wondering if a way to get around this is adding a state after `Completed` e.g. `ManifestSynced` or similar that becomes the marker that a compaction has definitely been synced to the manifest. It also marks that this compaction can now be trimmed which resolves your concern in the second scenario. The manifest is current state, and contains no history of past state. If I'm understanding your scenario correctly then adding `ManifestSynced` status becomes the point at which the compaction is gc'd and the coordinator no longer picks it up.

Reviewer 2: IIUC, it's better to ignore a compaction result than to accidentally sync one that's already been synced and then GC'd. This makes me want to design the failure scenario to be that way. 

If we make the protocol (1) update `.compactions` to remove the job then (2) update `.manifest` then a failure between 1 and 2 would result in lost work, but a compaction scheduler would eventually determine this and reschedule the compaction.

Not sure that helps 😆 but I don't think `ManifestSynced` helps because you have the same problem if you write the manifest, then fail, you may not have updated compactions to `ManifestSynced`.

Reviewer: Thought about this a bit. I'm actually not sure the timeline I described above can happen. Specifically:

```
t3, coordinator2 syncs job1 (correctly)
t4-t7, ..the SSTs in job1 are compacted out by subsequent jobs
```

I don't think this is possible. The coordinator always resyncs on startup then updates .compactions file before it schedules any more jobs. Thus, the SSTs can't be compacted out in t4-t7. So I think it's quite likely we don't have a problem. We spent a fair amount of time thinking about this when building the compactor state protocol.

I think the realistic timeline is:

```
t3, coordinator2 syncs job1 (correctly) <- this includes both the .manifest and .compactions update
t4-t7, ..the SSTs in job1 are compacted out by subsequent jobs <-  this is fine because .compactions is already updated.
```

If coordinator 2 fails between the .manifest update and the .compactions update, that's fine: the next coordinator can detect it already updated the .manifest but the .compactions file hasn't yet been reconciled.

Reviewer: I do think we might still want a state after `Completed` like `Archived` or something. So the coordinator sees completed jobs, updates .manifest, then updates .compactions with the `Archived` state for jobs that were completed and have been updated in the .manifest. IIRC, this is something we were considering earlier but didn't have a need for it.

Reviewer: Ah! I forgot. This is how .manifest <> .compactions reconciliation works today:

>   1. CompactorStateWriter::new() loads the latest manifest and the stale .compactions file, converts any persisted Running compaction back to Submitted, trims old finished entries, and immediately writes
>     that recovery state back out. See slatedb/src/compactor_state_protocols.rs:129.
>  2. The manifest already contains the completed compaction effects, because finish_compaction() removed the source L0/SRs, inserted the output sorted run, and updated last_compacted_l0_* before persistence.
>     See slatedb/src/compactor_state.rs:675.
>  3. On the first ticker, the handler tries to start submitted compactions. Validation requires that every source still exist in the current manifest state. Since those sources were already removed by the
>     successful manifest write, validation fails with InvalidCompaction at the “source missing from db state” check. See slatedb/src/compactor.rs:694 and slatedb/src/compactor.rs:801.
>  4. That stale compaction is then marked Failed and .compactions is rewritten. It is not re-run, and the manifest is not rolled back.

We use the validator to protect against the races I was describing. 👍  So we're safe. No extra state needed.

Reviewer: To close this thought a bit, here's what we have now:

```text
Submitted <-> Running --> Completed
    |             |
    |             v
    +----------> Failed
```

The `Compactor` updates from `Running` to `Completed` _after_ it updates the manifest right now. So the flow is:

1. `Compactor` receives `CompactionJobFinished` from executor [status=`Running`]
2. `Compactor` calls `finish_compaction` -> `finish_compaction`, which updates in-memory manifest and compactor state [status(mem)=Completed, status(obj_store)=`Running`]
3. `Compactor` calls `state_writer.write_state_safely()`, which writes `.manifest` _first_ then `.compactions`. [status=`Completed`]

If a failure occurs on (3) between `.manifest` and `.compactions` update, the status in object store remains `Running`. On restart, the compactor will set the job back to `Submitted`.

```rs
// Move running compactions back to submitted so we can resume them after restart.
// Submitted compactions are left intact for future scheduling.
// Keep only the most recent finished compaction for GC safety (#1044).
dirty_compactions.value.iter_mut().for_each(|c| {
    if matches!(c.status(), CompactionStatus::Running) {
        c.set_status(CompactionStatus::Submitted);
    }
});
dirty_compactions.value.retain_active_and_last_finished();
```

Since it's already been update in `.manifest`, the `validate_compaction()` will fail when the compactor attempts to re-run it--the sources are already removed from the `.manifest` in the last update. The job will be marked as failed due to the invalid compaction, which is fine--it actually succeed but the scheduler doesn't care either way.

When the worker becomes remote, we no longer get an in-memory `CompactionJobFinished`. To get around this, the RFC proposes having the worker set the status to `Complete` _before_ the .manifest is updated. This is a departure from the current protocol.

I think setting `Complete` before `.manifest` update still works, but the compactor will need to try rescheduling all `Complete` jobs in the `.compactions` file, not just all `Running` jobs. This should be safe since the truly complete ones will be rejected using the same `validate_compaction()` check. They will all get transitioned from `Completed` to `Failed`, though, which seems not great.

I am starting to think we should add a state in between--`Compacted`--which signals that the worker is done and the manifest might or might not have been updated.

```text
Submitted <-> Running --> Compacted --> Completed
    |             |           | 
    |             v           |
    +----------> Failed <-----+
```

So the worker will mark the compaction as `Compacted`. This will be equivalent to the `CompactionJobFinished` signal we get now. The compactor then will update the .manifest and .compactions. On the .compactions update, the status will be set to `Completed`.

On startup, the compactor logic becomes:

- Retry any `Running` jobs (transition them to `Submitted`)
- Retry updating .manifest/.compactions for any `Compacted` jobs (and transition them to `Completed` or `Failed` depending on )
- Retain the active (submitted, running, compacted) and last finished (completed, failed)

What do you guys think?

Author: I agree about another state being needed but still thinking/reading through this. I'll add some more detailed thoughts tomorrow but wondering if Almog's comment still applies to the state you proposed.

> Not sure that helps 😆 but I don't think ManifestSynced helps because you have the same problem if you write the manifest, then fail, you may not have updated compactions to ManifestSynced.

Not sure yet if your proposal makes this a non issue. Still thinking about it.

Author: > 3. On the first ticker, the handler tries to start submitted compactions. Validation requires that every source still exist in the current manifest state. Since those sources were already removed by the
successful manifest write, validation fails with InvalidCompaction at the “source missing from db state” check. See slatedb/src/compactor.rs:694 and slatedb/src/compactor.rs:801.
> 4. That stale compaction is then marked Failed and .compactions is rewritten. It is not re-run, and the manifest is not rolled back.

I think you're right that these validator checks handle the case that @agavra was concerned about (writing the manifest and failing to write updated state to compactions). 

I'll go ahead and update the RFC with the `Compacted` state after `Running`. You're also right that any .manifest<-->.compactions inconsistency could be resolved by rescheduling `Completed` in addition to `Running` jobs on coordinator restart (via `validate_compactions()`), but I prefer the clean separation that `Compacted` gives.

> 2. Update the manifest: remove source SRs/SSTs, insert output SR, update `l0_last_compacted`.

Reviewer: Why update `l0_last_compacted`?

Author: My understanding is that this keeps track of the last compacted L0 sst so that already compacted L0 SSTs are not re-compacted. Without it, the scheduler would keep proposing compactions for entries already committed to `compacted`.

The reader and writer both interact with it as well. The reader - so that it does not try to read l0 ssts that no longer exist, the writer - so it does not account for already compacted l0 ssts when deciding to apply backpressure to writes.

I will look into this more to double check my reasoning and if this reasoning holds with `ManifestV2` before updating the RFC.

Reviewer: Ah, right, total brain fart on my part.

Both existing compaction modes share the same single-node ceiling: in-process compaction competes with the write path for CPU and I/O, and the standalone compactor offloads compute but is still capped by a single node's resources. The only way to raise this ceiling is to distribute compaction execution across multiple workers. Furthermore, offloading compute from an embedded compactor to a standalone compactor at runtime adds extra complexity to the single-compactor design. If a standalone compactor is started alongside a compactor embedded in the writer, the compactor's epoch is rewritten by the new compaction process. This fences the Db, disabling all Db operations. A solution to this is to hand-off the job of coordination to the new process, but this requires additional complexity without the added benefit of horizontal scaling.

> The design in this RFC sidesteps this complexity by keeping compaction coordination embedded in the Db and distributing only compaction workloads between both embedded and external worker processes. This removes the need for any type of leadership handoff of compaction coordination while allowing compaction compute costs to be offloaded. Since SlateDB already uses the object store as its sole coordination primitive, the `.compactions` file provides everything needed to schedule and claim work across processes.

Reviewer 2: nice, I like this design quite a bit. we should note that it makes liveness of compaction and the database coupled. if you have something that causes your database node to crash on a loop you'll also have compaction grind to a halt. I think that's an acceptable tradeoff

Reviewer: Yea, my thinking with this design is that, if the `Db` is dead, you have no writers. If you have no writers, the SSTs in L0 and the SRs are static. It's true compaction could make _some_ progress if there's still work to be done to get to a balanced state with the compactor scheduler, but it would it will pick this work back up when the `Db` starts again anyway.

Reviewer 3: What's the benefit to _forcing_ compaction to be embedded? Communication between the compactor and the writer is strictly via the manifest, so it doesn't really make things simpler to require it to be embedded. On the other hand I think there's potential benefits to allowing the lifecycle of the compaction coordinator to be decoupled from the writer. Off the cuff:
- short-lived embedded writers so you wouldn't run a long-lived compactor
- one approach to multi-writer might be to have writers with separate WALs outside of slatedb but allow them to push l0s into a shared manifest
- the compactor is also potentially where significant custom code could run (custom compaction scheduling, filters, etc). You might want to support a separate lifecycle for that code.

These are admittedly speculative and not particularly well thought out, but it makes me a little nervous to assume/require the compactor is embedded, especially if there's no benefit.

Reviewer: The main benefit was that it lets us punt on leadership election and failover by piggybacking off the `Db`. If it's not in `Db`, then it has to run elsewhere, and now we need to figure out how to elect the current coordinator. We have all the machinery to do it, it's just ..more 😛

Reviewer 3: I don't follow. I think it's fine to require that there's only ever 1 coordinator. The current protocol already guarantees this. From there it's up to the user to either enable or disable the compactor in the writer or run a standalone coordinator. How they ensure there is a single coordinator process most of the time is up to them - that's the same problem as the writer.

Reviewer: 🤔 Hmm, I guess you're right. It's no different than the existing standalone compactor, as you said.

One complaint we've received is that you can't dynamically add the standalone compactor right now (https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/issues/1119). If you do, the writer gets completely fenced. If we allow the coordinator to live outside the writer, it will also fence the writer when we spin up the standalone coordinator. This is minor, and can be fixed, though--we can gracefully degrade the coordinator without killing the whole `Db` as we do now. We should arguable do that with the compactor

Author: @rodesai This is a good point. I don't see any reason the coordinator couldn't run as a standalone instance. 

 It does need to learn about flushed L0, but the RFC never proposes coupling the coordinator to DbState. The design is already poll-based as written so the standalone coordinator would just need to be pointed to the same object store path. That said, an embedded coordinator could subscribe to flush completion events directly rather than polling but is not in the RFC as written.

Author: @criccomini 

> One complaint we've received is that you can't dynamically add the standalone compactor right now (https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/issues/1119). If you do, the writer gets completely fenced. If we allow the coordinator to live outside the writer, it will also fence the writer when we spin up the standalone coordinator.

Since the design assumes only one process modifies the `compactor_epoch` , starting a standalone coordinator fences the writer because there is another coordinator embedded in the writer with it's own perception of what `compactor_epoch` should be. From what I understand, if we allow standalone coordination as Rohan is describing there wouldn't be a coordinator embedded in the writer and the standalone instance would own the `compactor_epoch` making it a non-issue.

Reviewer: Yea, the use case though is when you start with the compactor in the Db, then at some point later, you decide to deploy the standalone because you need scale. That kills the Db right now. 

One can (rightfully) argue that the user has to handle fencing _anyway_ so what difference does it make. But I think in some cases where the user expects the writer to only ever be on one machine it can be a surprise.

Anyway, it's a separate problem. It was just something that got solved for free by the current RFC, but won't if we put the coordinator separately.

```

- **Coordinator** (`CompactorEventHandler`) — always runs embedded in the DB process. Polls the manifest, asks the scheduler for `CompactionSpec` proposals, creates `Compaction` entities, calls `executor.start_compaction_job()`, and commits completed results to the manifest. Scheduler logic is unchanged.
- **Workers** — poll `.compactions`, claim `Submitted` jobs via optimistic concurrency, execute using the existing `execute_compaction_job` path, report completion. Workers do not touch the manifest or run the scheduler.

### Configuration

#### Coordinator

Compaction is always distributed allowing additional compactors to be added as needed:

```rust
pub struct CompactorOptions {
    // ... existing fields unchanged ...

    /// How long before a worker with no heartbeat is considered stale and its job reclaimed.
    pub worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms: u64,
}
```

Via settings:

```toml
[compactor_options]
worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms = 30000
max_concurrent_compactions = 2
```

The coordinator (`CompactorEventHandler`) always runs embedded in the DB process and behaves identically in both cases. The only difference is which `CompactionExecutor` it uses:

> - `compactor_options = Some(options)` — uses `TokioCompactionExecutor`, which spawns in-process Tokio tasks to execute compaction jobs. This is the existing single-node behavior, unchanged.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we should always use `RemoteCompactionExecutor` and just spin up a worker locally on a new tokio runtime. The downside of obivously that it communicates over object storage when it otherwise doesn't need to, the benefit is that we have only a single model for compaction. It also seems to allow for a more "smooth" rollout strategy.

Author: I didn't consider this in an effort to not slow down the existing embedded compaction process but agree that it simplifies things a bit.

> It also seems to allow for a more "smooth" rollout strategy.

I'm not sure about this one. Is the idea that we'll be able to spot bugs in the distributed compaction protocol even if the worker is embedded? That makes sense to me but like you said we would be trading extra compaction latency for simplicity.

Reviewer: IMO, we should always run the workers as though they're remote. I like the simplicity of `RemoteCompactionExecutor` always vs. having two different executors.

One thing to consider with this approach is API cost, though. You will have your workers polling the object store for work (billable GET API calls). If you want to keep the latency between job creation and job execution relatively short, you would need to have all your workers polling pretty frequently.

Right now, the "workers" get notified through `this_executor.start_compaction_job(job_args);`, so it's immediate; there's no polling between when a job is scheduled and when it begins executing. 🤔 

If we imagine a writer doing 1GB/s with 64MB L0 max sst, that's 16 L0's per second. With default max of 8 L0's allowed, backpressure will begin in 500ms. That means the compactor workers would need to poll really frequently (or the user will need to increase L0 SST size and/or max L0 count allowed). 🤔 

Maybe we do need a side channel that the scheduler can send to. We could still use `RemoteCompactionExecutor` for everything; they'd all just have a side channel. The one in the `Db` would receive notifications (maybe just for L0?) while the remote ones wouldn't? Not sure.

Reviewer 2: > One thing to consider with this approach is API cost, though.

A 1s poll interval costs $12/mo/worker. If you're paying for 1GB/s with WAL writes and L0s flushes you can probably also handle $24/mo/worker for compaction.

That said, I don't think compaction can keep up with anywhere near 1GB/s writes at the moment anyway so I think we can punt that problem for now. (My tests show that our use case is currently at 20-30MB/s processed CPU-bound in compaction, so we need two orders of magnitude more to keep up with 1GB/s on a single writer anyway)

Reviewer: I should note: I think we already have this problem now with the standalone compactor. If we're running the remote standalone compactor, the L0's need to be moved off (and polled via manifest) anyway. So perhaps it's not worth worrying about.

Reviewer: @agavra agreed. 👍

Reviewer: @ryandielhenn I think it's worth capturing this discussion somewhere in the doc and updating the RFC to suggest we using only `RemoteCompactionExecutor`.

- `compactor_options = None` — uses `RemoteCompactionExecutor`, which writes `Submitted` jobs to `.compactions` and polls for `Completed` rather than spawning local tasks. Execution is handled entirely by external `CompactorWorkerBuilder` processes.

Both implement the `CompactionExecutor` trait; the coordinator calls `executor.start_compaction_job()` the same way regardless.

> `max_concurrent_compactions` controls how many jobs a single worker may hold simultaneously.

Reviewer 2: what's this flag? I wonder if we can simple it by just having every worker only ever handle a single compaction. parallelism is a function of increasing the number of workers (they can be collocated in a single process). Again another downside is obviously contention on object storage but I suspect there will be very little contention even with a large pool of workers.

Author: This is the idea that I initially had. In theory, if a worker takes one job at a time, work stays evenly distributed as the workload changes. If this is set to something larger and workload is light for periods of time then you're right that one compaction process could steal all of the jobs. 

The existing behavior is that `max_concurrent_compactions` limits how many compaction jobs can run simultaneously on the single compaction  process. This is why i pinned it as a per-compaction-process config but I don't feel strongly either way. 

Another reason I changed this to a per-compaction-process config (set on coordinator, read by workers) is that it does not limit the number of compaction processes that could run. As workloads change I expect that the user may need more compaction processes that they did not initially account for forcing them to change the config on the Db if this controlled how many compaction processes could run simultaneously.

Reviewer: I like the idea of controlling parallelism by process count rather than config. OTOH, I think `max_concurrent_compactions` is helpful if we want to keep memory usage down. For example, if we only have `RemoteCompactionExecutor` and only one job per worker, then in the "normal" (out of the box) `Db` case, we'll need to spin up four `RemoteCompactionExecutor`s in the `Db` process. Each will need to poll the object store (racking up GET billing). It seems like `max_concurrent_compactions` helps with both these issues.

Author: > For example, if we only have RemoteCompactionExecutor and only one job per worker, then in the "normal" (out of the box) Db case, we'll need to spin up four RemoteCompactionExecutors in the Db process. Each will need to poll the object store (racking up GET billing). 

I think we're aligned, but in the chance my understanding is incorrect I'd be happy to update the RFC.

Reviewer 2: makes sense to me 👍 the practical considerations of `max_concurrent_compactions` probably outweigh the elegance of not having it

#### Workers

> Workers don't use `CompactorOptions`. The primary setting is `worker_poll_interval_ms`, which controls how often a worker checks `.compactions` for new jobs.

Reviewer 2: it's probably worth introducing a jitter so that we don't have all the workers try to check the `.compactions` at the same time, all try to claim, and all of them conflict

Author: Cool idea, I agree.

New `CompactorWorkerBuilder` entrypoint for worker processes:

```rust
let worker = CompactorWorkerBuilder::new("/path/to/db", object_store.clone())
    .with_poll_interval_ms(5000)
    .build()
    .await?;

worker.run().await?;
```

### Schema Changes

Extend the `Compaction` table in `compactor.fbs`:

```fbs
table Compaction {
    // Existing fields (unchanged)
    id: Ulid (required);
    spec: CompactionSpec (required);
    status: CompactionStatus;
    output_ssts: [CompactedSsTable];

    // NEW
    worker_id: string;          // empty = unclaimed

>     last_heartbeat_ms: uint64;  // wall-clock ms of last progress write

Reviewer 2: nit: consider making this:
```
worker: WorkerSpec
```
That way we can add fields into `WorkerSpec` if we want more easily and keep this flattened.

1. Poll `.compactions` every `worker_poll_interval_ms`.
2. Find up to `max_concurrent_compactions` `Compaction` entries with `status == Submitted` and empty `worker_id`.
3. Write the full updated state with `status = Running`, `worker_id = <self>`, `last_heartbeat_ms = now()` to the next sequence number.
4. On success: begin execution. On `AlreadyExists`: re-read latest and retry from step 2.

Workers claim up to `max_concurrent_compactions` jobs at a time, limiting the number of compactions affected by a worker crash and distributing work evenly across workers.

### Heartbeat and Failure Detection

Workers update `last_heartbeat_ms` in two ways:

1. **On SST flush** — piggybacked on the RFC-0013 progress-persistence write each time an output SST is written (~256MB boundaries).

> 2. **On poll** — workers continue polling `.compactions` every `worker_poll_interval_ms` even when they have active jobs (to pick up additional work up to `max_concurrent_compactions`). When a worker has at least one `Running` job, each poll write includes an updated `last_heartbeat_ms`. This ensures liveness when SST output is slow (e.g. low-throughput or large single-SST jobs that take longer than the timeout to produce their first output), without requiring a separate heartbeat config on the worker. `worker_poll_interval_ms` must be well below `worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms` for this to work; a reasonable constraint is `worker_poll_interval_ms <= worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms / 2`.

Reviewer 2: I'm OK with this for now but we might want to separate the poll interval from the heartbeat interval. It would be nice to poll much more frequently than trying to write a file to avoid unnecessary conflicts and it's probably OK to have a pretty relaxed heartbeat interval (prompt failure detection isn't so critical for compaction).

Reviewer: I agree this section needs a bit of thought.

I kind of like the idea of tying the heartbeat to the the compaction progress. We could have something like `heartbeat_bytes` that tells the compactor worker to heartbeat every N bytes. This would allow us to detect and take over degraded machines.

For example, a machine that can't keep up with 10MB in 30s should probably be taken over by another worker. And since we have compactor resume, we only lose the current SST that the slow/degraded compactor is working on.

So it'd look like:

- heartbeat on SST write
- heartbeat every N bytes processed
- poll every worker_poll_interval_ms (but no heartbeat)

We would probably also want to suppress heartbeats that occur too rapidly as well (e.g. don't heartbeat more than once every `worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms / 2` intervals.

My concern with the current approach is that we can have a degraded worker owning the L0 compaction and continuing to heartbeat while not making any real progress. If that happens, the whole DB grinds to a halt. At least with an every-N-bytes we can guarantee some minimum throughput threshold.

Author: I like the idea of heart-beating after processing some amount of bytes a lot. I think this decouples writes from polling and also allows us to catch degrading workers instead of just "Dead" workers. 

worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms is a coordinator config so unless we want to put it in object storage so that workers can pick it up we'll need to come up with a reasonable alternative. I'll spend some time thinking about it.

- [ ] Database splitting and merging
- [ ] Multi-writer

### Compaction

- [x] Compaction state persistence — extends `.compactions` schema with `worker_id`, `last_heartbeat_ms`
- [ ] Compaction filters
- [ ] Compaction strategies
- [x] Distributed compaction — this RFC
- [x] Compactions format — extends FlatBuffer schema with new fields

### Storage Engine Internals

- [ ] Write-ahead log (WAL)
- [ ] Block cache
- [ ] Object store cache
- [ ] Indexing (bloom filters, metadata)
- [ ] SST format or block format

### Ecosystem & Operations

- [ ] CLI tools
- [ ] Language bindings (Go/Python/etc)
- [x] Observability (metrics/logging/tracing) — coordinator metrics

## Operations

### Performance & Cost

- **Latency**: No change to read/write latency. Compaction latency decreases with more workers.
- **Throughput**: Scales roughly linearly with worker count, bounded by per-worker object store bandwidth.
- **Object-store requests**: ~1 GET per poll interval + ~1 PUT per claim + ~1 PUT per output SST. At N=10 workers polling every 5s: ~120 GETs/min overhead.
- **Space/write/read amplification**: Unchanged.

### Observability

> New metrics, all tracked by the coordinator from `.compactions` state:

Reviewer 2: we might want a "last seen heartbeat ms" tagged by the worker id. it'll create a lot of series churn though if workers churn frequently, but I think it's an important liveness metric

3. **Failure detection** — heartbeat timeout and reclamation on the coordinator; resume via `ResumingIterator`.

### Docs Updates

- Add examples to API documentation.
- Update compaction documentation to describe how to run distributed compaction.

## Alternatives

### Status quo (single compactor)

Only run one compaction process per instance of SlateDb, either embedded or standalone.  
**Rejected:** Can't meet the scaling goal. Introduces complexity around offloading compute from embedded to standalone-compactor at runtime (see [PR #1529](https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/1529)).

### Peer-to-peer leader election via object store

All compactors are peers; optimistic concurrency on a numbered file elects a leader to run the scheduler.  
**Rejected:** Adds complexity around leader transitions and scheduler handoff. Could be a future evolution.

### chitchat for work distribution/discovery

Use gossip to distribute jobs directly.  
**Rejected:** couples correctness to gossip consistency; chitchat is better as an optional discovery/health layer.

## Open Questions

> - What is the right default for `worker_poll_interval_ms`? Should it be adaptive (e.g. exponential backoff when no work is available)?

Reviewer 2: GETs are cheap. 1/s ends up being like $12/mo on S3. I think the problem is that L0 compactions are critical to happen ASAP whereas others can wait. If I only had a single worker I'd probably schedule a 1-5s poll interval. If I had more I'd probably multiply that by the number of workers. 🤷 I think a good OOTB experience is probably is 1s given that's the manifest poll interval.

> - How should GC handle the window between a worker writing output SSTs and the coordinator committing the manifest? GC must not delete SSTs that are not yet manifest-referenced.

Reviewer 3: The GC already handles this. It inspects the compactions file, tracks the creation time of the oldest compaction, and doesn't delete any SSTs newer than that time. The current mechanism should be sufficient for what's proposed here.

> - Should workers validate their `CompactionSpec` against the current manifest before executing? Validating catches stale specs but adds a manifest read per claim.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't seem necessary. The coordinator already validates that it never writes a bad spec and always makes safe updates to the manifest. The workers should just be dumb byte churners.

> - Is optimistic claiming sufficient at high worker counts (50+), or will contention require sharding across multiple `.compactions` files?

Reviewer 2: I'm OK with this. I think high worker counts are still likely to have low claiming contention given a single compaction runs for a long time.

Author: I think your idea of adding jitter to the worker polls also helps a lot with this concern.

Reviewer 3: The bigger point of contention will probably be heartbeating. Relaxing the heartbeat interval as discussed above seems like a good place to start. I'm also not too bothered about contention on the `Compactions` file. At worst it adds a little latency before starting compaction. Maybe it'll be an issue for L0 but we can keep it simple to start with.

> - How should existing per-compaction metrics (`bytes_processed`, `ssts_written`, `job_duration_seconds`) work for remote workers? Workers are separate processes with no metrics infrastructure: should they be reported by the coordinator based on what it observes in `.compactions`, or does each worker need its own metrics endpoint?

Reviewer 2: I think workers should have the same metrics infrastructure introduced by the metrics RFC and users can wire in reporting as they'd like. The worker should tag the metrics with the worker id.

Author: SGTM, I'll look into this and update the RFC.

Author: I updated this RFC to use the Metrics RFC and added more detail about which process records which metrics now that the coordinator/worker are separate. Also added last_seen_hearbeat_ms tagged by `worker_id` as per your request. Am open to any feedback you have here.

> - ~~What happens when a worker is reclaimed due to a missed heartbeat but is still executing (zombie worker)? Both the zombie and the new worker may write `Completed` to `.compactions`. Both writes can succeed as new numbered files. If the zombie finishes first, the new worker wastes its work and the coordinator may process the zombie's `Completed` entry; if the new worker finishes first, the zombie's `Completed` write becomes an orphaned entry the coordinator must ignore. The coordinator needs to be idempotent when processing `Completed` entries to handle this correctly.~~ **Resolved:** The operator should configure worker_poll_interval_ms <= worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms / 2. The problem is then largely sidestepped if the worker piggybacks heartbeats (updates to last_heartbeat_ms) on every poll and continues to poll regardless of how many compaction jobs are running. 

Reviewer 2: can we prevent this by only allowing you to update from Claimed -> Completed if the worker id matches your id? then zombies would have wasted work, but that's OK and expected from a zombie situation.

> The operator should configure worker_poll_interval_ms <= worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms / 2. The problem is then largely sidestepped if the worker piggybacks heartbeats (updates to last_heartbeat_ms) on every poll and continues to poll regardless of how many compaction jobs are running. 

I don't see how this resolves the problem. There could be a pause between the poll and the update that causes this.

Author: This is a good point, you're right that the problem is not fully resolved by the constraint on the poll/heartbeat interval. I had made another open question right after this one about making the process of committing `Completed` jobs idempotent but realize now that this over complicates things. We can just no-op when the worker id doesn't match.

> - Should the coordinator be idempotent when committing `Completed` jobs to the Manifest to handle a zombie worker writing `Completed` to a reclaimed job? This could happen due to misconfigured `worker_poll_interval_ms` or a transient networking issue.

Reviewer 3: I'm not quite folllowing this one. 

> a zombie worker writing `Completed` to a reclaimed job?

It should be pretty simple for the protocol to prevent this right? A worker should only mark a job completed if its present in list of compactions, is in `Running` state and is assigned to that worker.

Author: You're right, matching worker-id is sufficient for writing the Completed Job; this somehow slipped my mind.

### Configuration

#### Coordinator

Distributed mode is opt-in via a `mode` field on `CompactorOptions`, configurable via `CompactorBuilder` or settings (TOML/JSON/YAML):

```rust
pub enum CompactorMode {
    /// Default. Coordinator executes jobs locally via TokioCompactionExecutor.
    Local,
    /// Coordinator writes Submitted jobs to `.compactions` and waits for remote workers
    /// to claim and execute them via RemoteCompactionExecutor.
    Distributed,
}

pub struct CompactorOptions {
    // ... existing fields unchanged ...

    pub mode: CompactorMode,
    /// How long before a worker with no heartbeat is considered stale and its job reclaimed.
    /// Only used in Distributed mode.
    pub worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms: u64,
    /// Maximum number of concurrent workers. None means unlimited.
    /// Only used in Distributed mode.
    pub max_workers: Option<u32>,
}
```

Via settings:

```toml
[compactor_options]
mode = "distributed"
worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms = 30000
max_workers = 10
```

> When `mode = "distributed"`, the coordinator uses `RemoteCompactionExecutor` instead of `TokioCompactionExecutor`. Both implement the `CompactionExecutor` trait and the coordinator calls `executor.start_compaction_job()` the same way regardless of mode. `RemoteCompactionExecutor` writes a `Submitted` job to `.compactions` and polls for `Completed` rather than spawning a local task.

Author: I'm still thinking through the .compactions ↔ manifest sync issue. I'm wondering if `write_compactions_safely` in `compactor_state_protocols.rs` could be rewritten somehow.

I like this idea, the manifest already uses create-if-not-exists optimistic concurrency, and the DB writer + compactor already share it that way, so concurrent manifest commits from multiple compactors should be fine.

> When `mode = "distributed"`, the coordinator uses `RemoteCompactionExecutor` instead of `TokioCompactionExecutor`. Both implement the `CompactionExecutor` trait and the coordinator calls `executor.start_compaction_job()` the same way regardless of mode. `RemoteCompactionExecutor` writes a `Submitted` job to `.compactions` and polls for `Completed` rather than spawning a local task.

Author: Every worker that commits a finished compaction needs to read the manifest first, so every worker would need the full manifest in memory before it can safely write it
  - `write_manifest_safely`'s retry loop handles concurrent manifest writers so multiple workers using this should work
  - `write_compactions_safely` would need desired_value recomputed inside the retry loop 
  - `merge_remote_compactions` would need richer merge semantics. Right now the merge skips compactions with non-submitted status because it is assumed that a single compactor controls all state transitions. We would need to handle `Running`, `Completed`, and `Failed` here since other workers would be handling state transitions for their subset of compactions.
  
  Waiting to hear your thoughts before updating the RFC but I do think this is mechanically possible.

> When `mode = "distributed"`, the coordinator uses `RemoteCompactionExecutor` instead of `TokioCompactionExecutor`. Both implement the `CompactionExecutor` trait and the coordinator calls `executor.start_compaction_job()` the same way regardless of mode. `RemoteCompactionExecutor` writes a `Submitted` job to `.compactions` and polls for `Completed` rather than spawning a local task.

Reviewer: After seeing your latest idea of Db-is-coordinator, I think your proposal should be fine. This is quite elegant. It keeps the coordinator in a single place, and also puts it in the same process as the writer, which is a nice feature. 👍  (see my comment above).

    spec: CompactionSpec (required);
    status: CompactionStatus;
    output_ssts: [CompactedSsTable];

    // NEW
    worker_id: string;          // empty = unclaimed
    last_heartbeat_ms: uint64;  // wall-clock ms of last progress write
}
```

Both fields are optional (default: `""`, `0`); existing `.compactions` files require no migration.

### Work Claim Protocol

Workers use optimistic concurrency on `.compactions`. SlateDB implements this uniformly across all object stores, including those with native CAS support, using create-if-not-exists on sequentially-numbered files (e.g. `00000000000000000003.compactions`). Writing a new version means writing the next numbered file; if another writer got there first the write fails with `AlreadyExists` and the worker retries. See [RFC-0001](0001-manifest.md) for the full protocol.

1. Poll `.compactions` every `worker_poll_interval_ms`.
2. Find a `Compaction` with `status == Submitted` and empty `worker_id`.
3. Write the full updated state with `status = Running`, `worker_id = <self>`, `last_heartbeat_ms = now()` to the next sequence number.
4. On success: begin execution. On `AlreadyExists`: re-read latest and retry from step 2.

> Workers claim one job at a time to minimize contention.

Author: This is a good point. Contention is on who gets to write the next numbered file not how many jobs are claimed in the write. I think the better argument for claiming one job at a time is distribution of jobs across workers rather than letting one of them monopolize.

### Heartbeat and Failure Detection

> Workers update `last_heartbeat_ms` each time an output SST is written (piggy-backing on the RFC-0013 progress-persistence writes, roughly every ~256MB).

Reviewer: This means they'd need to process a full 256mib file every 30s or less (default). I suspect we'll want to heartbeat every `worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms / 2` in the write loop (as well as when a new SST is flushed).

Author: After a second look I'm realizing that `worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms` is a coordinator config. 
The worker has `worker_heartbeat_poll_interval_ms`. There was an open question about a worker being reclaimed due to a missed heartbeat but still executing and how to handle this. I've documented that the operator should configure worker_poll_interval_ms <= worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms/2 as the resolution to this open question. I added another open question as a follow up: as a safety net, should we make the coordinator idempotent when committing `Completed` jobs to the manifest to handle zombie workers in the misconfiguration case?

> The coordinator detects stale workers during its periodic poll: for each `Running` compaction where `now() - last_heartbeat_ms > worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms`, reset `status = Submitted` and clear `worker_id`. The reclaimed compaction retains its `output_ssts`, so the next worker resumes from the last checkpoint via `ResumingIterator` (seeks input iterators past the last written key, avoiding re-processing already compacted data).

Author: There is a comment in compactor_state.rs line 176 

```
  /// Current status for this compaction.
  ///
  /// This is tracked only in memory at the moment.
```

This is misleading because compactor_state_protocols.rs lines 146-156 talks about persisting the recover state and after a brief code trace it seems to be what is happening.

```
 // Move running compactions back to submitted so we can resume them after restart.
// Submitted compactions are left intact for future scheduling.
// Keep only the most recent finished compaction for GC safety (#1044).
dirty_compactions.value.iter_mut().for_each(|c| {
     if matches!(c.status(), CompactionStatus::Running) {
          c.set_status(CompactionStatus::Submitted);
     }
}); 
dirty_compactions.value.retain_active_and_last_finished();
// Persist recovery state before any refresh() can overwrite it. 
compactions.update(dirty_compactions.clone()).await?;
```

> The coordinator detects stale workers during its periodic poll: for each `Running` compaction where `now() - last_heartbeat_ms > worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms`, reset `status = Submitted` and clear `worker_id`. The reclaimed compaction retains its `output_ssts`, so the next worker resumes from the last checkpoint via `ResumingIterator` (seeks input iterators past the last written key, avoiding re-processing already compacted data).

Reviewer: Thanks for looking into this. It's quite likely that in-memory comment is out of date. Initially, we only tracked compactor resume states in memory during the transition to stateful compaction. :) Feel free to update as you work on PRs :)

    pub worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms: u64,

    /// Whether to spawn an in-process CompactionWorker alongside the coordinator.
    /// Defaults to true. Set to false when all workers run as separate processes.
    pub embedded_worker: bool,
}
```

Via settings:

```toml
[compactor_options]
worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms = 10000
max_concurrent_compactions = 2
embedded_worker = true
```

The coordinator always uses `RemoteCompactionExecutor`. `embedded_worker = true` (the default) spawns a `CompactionWorker` in the same process. `embedded_worker = false` expects workers to run as separate `CompactionWorker` processes.

`max_concurrent_compactions` controls how many jobs a single worker may hold simultaneously.

#### Workers

Workers use `CompactorWorkerOptions` instead of `CompactorOptions`. The primary settings are:

```rust
pub struct CompactionWorkerOptions {
  // How often a worker checks `.compactions` for new jobs.
  pub poll_interval_ms: u64,

  // How many bytes a worker must process before emitting a heartbeat.
  pub heartbeat_bytes: u64,

  // Minimum wall-clock time between heartbeat writes.
  pub heartbeat_min_interval_ms: u64,
}
```

> - `poll_interval_ms` is used for polling frequency. Each poll sleeps for `poll_interval_ms + random(0, poll_interval_ms * 0.1)` to prevent workers from synchronizing on `.compactions` reads. This jitter is applied on every poll and requires no configuration.

Reviewer 2: nit: `compactions_poll_interval_ms` so it's obvious what's being polled (we have a lot of poll intervals)

Author: Noticed that I called this `worker_poll_interval_ms` elsewhere in the RFC, but agree that `compactions_poll_interval_ms` is even better. I'll update the RFC to stay consistent.

> - `heartbeat_bytes` is used to tie heartbeats to compaction progress and gives the coordinator a minimum throughput guarantee. A worker that falls behind this rate will be reclaimed and its job handed off, regardless of whether its event loop is still alive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `heartbeat_bytes` is used to tie heartbeats to compaction progress and gives the coordinator a liveness guarantee. A worker that falls behind this rate will be reclaimed and its job handed off, regardless of whether its event loop is still alive.
```
minor nit about distributed systems lingo

- `heartbeat_min_interval_ms` suppresses heartbeats triggered by `heartbeat_bytes` when processing is fast and should be set well below the coordinator's `worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms`.

New `CompactionWorkerBuilder` entrypoint for `CompactionWorker` processes:

```rust
let options = CompactionWorkerOptions {
    poll_interval_ms: 1000,
    heartbeat_bytes: 100_000,
    heartbeat_min_interval_ms: 10000,
};

let worker = CompactionWorkerBuilder::new("/path/to/db", object_store.clone())
    .with_options(options)
    .build()
    .await?;

worker.run().await?;
```

### Schema Changes

Extend the `Compaction` table in `compactor.fbs`:

```fbs
table WorkerSpec {

>     worker_id: string;          // empty = unclaimed

Reviewer: Might make sense to just make this `(requird)` and have `worker=null` (in `Compaction`) signal unclaimed. Unless we need to keep old heartbeats around without an assigned worker for some reason.

3. On `AlreadyExists`: re-read latest and retry the write.
4. Reset `bytes_since_last_heartbeat = 0` after a successful heartbeat write.

Polls do not emit heartbeats. Liveness is driven entirely by compaction progress.

**Failure Detection Protocol** (coordinator):

1. On each coordinator poll tick, read latest `.compactions`.
2. For each `Running` compaction where `now() - last_heartbeat_ms > worker_heartbeat_timeout_ms`: set `status = Submitted`, clear `worker_id`, retain `output_ssts` and `id`.
3. If any compactions were reclaimed in step 2, write updated state via `write_compactions_safely()`. The reclaimed compaction retains its `output_ssts`, so the next worker resumes from the last checkpoint via `ResumingIterator`.
4. On `AlreadyExists`: re-read latest and retry from step 1.

### Worker Lifecycle

1. **Start:** generate a ULID `worker_id`, load config.

> 2. **Poll:** read `.compactions`. If the worker has fewer than `max_concurrent_compactions` active jobs, look for `Submitted` entries to claim. Polls do not write heartbeats.

Reviewer: Nit: probably should check fewer than `max_concurrent_compactions` active jobs first, then read .compactions if it's <= max.
